you're suffering so much that you're like, oh my God, the wheels are coming off. I don't know if I can hold this. But if someone's like, guess what? You'll never have to work another day in your life. If you speed up, you're like, oh yeah, totally. I can speed up. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. --. And you're invited. Thanks for joining us. You're gonna learn how to be a better runner, how to be faster, how to be healthier, and maybe that will transfer into you being a better human being. And today we're talking to Matt Fitzgerald about the 25 lessons to self-mastery as it applies to running. And he's got a lot to share with us. I learned a lot. So strap in, hold on, and we're going for a ride. Let's talk about trail running essentials. We've got gear that needs to be comfortable, functional, and actually designed the way we run. And that's why we're excited about Jonji Spring Trail Wear Collection, a lineup made to help you go farther. If you're looking for the perfect trail short, check out the Women's 4-Inch Trail Short. These have serious storage, a smooth, compressive fit, and Silidad grippers that actually prevent ride up. So you can load them up with your nutrition, your hydration, even your phone, no bouncing, no shifting, just comfort. And let's not forget about the Multi Short. For both men and women, they're built for daily miles, epic adventures, and everything in between. It's a four-way stretch shell that gives amazing airflow. The moisture-wicking liner prevents chafing. The multi-pocket stash band holds up to one liter of gear. That's a game changer. So check out Jonji Spring Trail Wear Collection at jonji.com and use the code TRAILRUNNER for an exclusive Trail Runner Nation 10% off. Ready? Okay, hold on. We're gonna dink it and sink it. Scott, what's our secret weapon before hitting the trail or recording podcasts? And it's not stretching. We crack open a Ketone IQ and say, dink it and sink it. You might be asking yourself why. It's because Ketone IQ is high-performance energy in a bottle. No sugar crashes, just pure, clean fuel. And if you need an extra kick, they've got a caffeine shot. Five grams of ketones paired with 100 milligrams of caffeine for an instant boost. It's 28% more efficient than glucose alone, improves endurance by 2%, and increases power output by 15% after recovery. And that's why it's trusted by the Navy SEALs, Tour de France cyclists, and top athletes everywhere. Need it now? You can go to Sprouts Market. They have them in the chilled section. Or you can order online for free US shipping and a 60-day money-back guarantee. Trail Runner Nation listeners get 30% off their first subscription order at ketone.com slash trail runner. Welcome to another edition of Trail Runner Nation. My name is Don Freeman. And I'm Scott Warr. And returning just a few weeks later, maybe less than a month, is coach Matt Fitzgerald. We had such a good conversation with him. The conversation kind of turned into his experience with long COVID and coming back and having such a successful race and just pushing his own limits that we didn't, we just barely touched the tip of the iceberg of a new book that is coming out here on the 25th of March called Chasing Mastery, 25 Lessons to Cultivate Your Full Potential in Endurance Sports. And who doesn't want to cultivate their full potential in endurance sports? So if that doesn't apply to you, go ahead and turn off the podcast and go listen to the quilting podcast or something like that, a true crime podcast. But if you want to be better at running, if you want to be better at attaining your full potential, this is the episode for you because we have the person that wrote the book, Matt Fitzgerald. He's written tons of books. I can't even remember how many books. It's over 30. Matt, do you know how many books you've written? I'm going with 35. I knew it was over 30. And I still love bringing up the fact of one of my favorite books, which is Diet Cults, because that really resonated with me and continues to as I search social media and I see all of these different diets that are purported to make you the fittest and leanest and best athlete. And I just think of Diet Cults and come back to the premise of that book. So Matt, thank you for writing so many books. Let's get into this one, Chasing Mastery. I think my first question is, where do you come up with ideas for books and where did the idea for this one come up? Well, I'm just a curious person. So I have, like, I'm very passionate about running and endurance sports and coaching and athlete development and all those things. So, you know, like I'm immersed neck deep in all that stuff every day. And I also, I love learning and I never stop changing. So I don't really feel like I have to go looking for ideas. They just bubble up. Just, you know, by virtue of always finding myself somewhere I've never quite been before as an athlete and a coach. Do you get inspiration, not only from your life experience, but from some of the athletes you're coaching? Yeah, a whole ton. Yes. Yeah, especially now that I'm not only coaching athletes remotely through the internet, but have Dream Run Camp going on here in Flagstaff where we have, you know, real flesh and blood runners coming through all the time. You know, just like pretty close interaction with those athletes the whole time they're here. And yeah, I mean, things always like, you know, teachable moments or an athlete will encounter a problem that gets me thinking, you know, those types of, yeah, there's just an abundance of those opportunities to learn and be inspired. Let's frame this book or frame this discussion. I think that you do very well in the book by talking about who is the most successful athlete. Is it the one that stands on a podium and has a medal around her neck or his neck? Or is it the one that finishes with five minutes left on the timer, but they're completely- Spent. Spent, that's the word, spent. How do you define success? And then maybe parlay that into chasing mastery. How do you chase that mastery? So Matt, those are all the questions that we have on the podcast. You can pick them out and just fill the space. All right. There are only two questions, Freeman. Okay. I apologize. It was one that was kind of, I used the word parlay. It was parlayed into two, but it was basically one question. Do you need the question again, Matt? Because I've forgotten it now. I think I've got it, yes. Yeah, I mean, you know, everyone's entitled to their own definition of being good at a sport. I do this every now and then at Dream Run Camp. I'll just put it to the group. What does it mean to be good at running? And most people say it means you're faster than everyone else or you perform better. And obviously that is the most recognized definition of being good at running. But from my perspective, there is an alternative definition that is much more, I mean, I think democratic and inclusive, but I also think just fairer. And that is this idea that we all have a certain amount of fixed potential. And our journey as athletes is to see how much of that potential we can turn into actual performance. So, you know, I prefer that because it's more within an athlete's control and a coach's control. Whereas, you know, if you're the fastest, that might be by virtue of the fact that you just won the genetic lottery. You know, you were just born with a lot more potential. It could be by virtue of the fact that, you know, you're younger or healthier, things that are not within your control. And that's not really very satisfying, you know, just to like be born good and do nothing with it. And, you know, champions will say this, if they win easily, they're not very satisfied by that. Like they too, yes, they're trying to be faster than everyone else, but the real richness is like getting to a point where like, gosh, you know, I'm about as good at this sport as I could possibly be and I earned it. So that's what, you know, and as a coach, you know, that has to be my orientation, you know, because I coach athletes of all different ages, all different abilities. And like, it wouldn't make any sense for me to like, you know, put more energy into athletes who happen to be faster, like just treating them as more deserving of good coaching, just because of things that they, that are not within their control. So as a coach, I get the most satisfaction out of like seeing the most improvement in an athlete, not from just seeing someone who was pretty much, you know, fully formed out of the womb as a runner. I have multiple ideas that came rushing to my head as you were describing that. And one doesn't have anything to do with running. It's been in the news recently, if you're into skiing at all, there's an athlete named Michelle Schifrin who just won her 100th World Cup race. No one has ever done that before. And it reminded me of another Italian racer that I grew up with when I was skiing named Alberto Tomba and the guy just dominated. And it got to the point where it became boring to him. And so when he was either racing slalom or giant slalom where it's a combination of two runs, he would purposefully go slow the first run so that he was still in the top 10 or top 15, but he didn't give it his all so that he had to make up time on the second run. And so both of these athletes blessed with the genetic makeup, but also not satisfied with just the easy win like you said. I think also that one of the greatest lessons I've learned being in the backyard of Western States is seeing how many people turn out for the golden hour, which is the hour 29 and 30 versus the winners. And people love to see the winners. We all like winners, but the pure number of people that turn out for those people that are not genetically gifted or in their prime age or whatever, that still finish. And I love that whole thing. Yes, amen. Yeah, another example of that Alberto Tomba mindset is, I mean, you see that across the board in champion athletes. Another one that comes to mind is Chris Evert. So when Chris Evert was 17 years old, she was dominant. She was the hot new thing in women's tennis, close to unbeatable. And she was looking at breaking all the records for most tournament wins, most major wins. And then along comes an even younger phenom named Martina Navratilova. And initially that rivalry was very lopsided in Chris Evert's favor. Most times they met up, Chris E. won. But Martina, who had just been getting by on sheer talent up to that point, ran up against someone who was just playing better than her and more developed. She raised her game, turned the tables, and then the rivalry became very lopsided in Martina's favor. And that remained the case for several years. And then Chris E. is like, I've got to figure out how to be number one again. And she changed her game so that she could return to beating Martina. And so there's a final phase of that rivalry toward the end of Chris E.'s career, where it was very even. It was real parity. And then if you look at the whole thing, they ended up almost dead even in terms of a number of times each beat the other in tournaments and majors. And what both of them will say is like, thank goodness for my rival, because I would never have approached the heights of mastery of the game of tennis. So they're losing more than they would have if not for the rival, but they're happy for that. They don't like the individual losses, but they love the opportunity to stretch themselves further. And that's what I'm really talking about. And competition pushes us everywhere, whether it's in business or whatever we're doing, we need that extra push to hear the footsteps behind us or see the footsteps ahead of us to keep us striving. And all of a sudden we do things with the clock or with the finish distance that wouldn't have happened. And so my question to you is, you speak to a lot of athletes virtually that you're training or a dream camp that you're working with. What's the most common goal for athletes when you speak to them? Or I wanna get on the podium, I wanna, what do you hear mostly? What are the most I want us that you hear as coach? Qualify for Boston. Like in terms of like specific goals, I think that's it. Just because everyone knows about it, it's become like a real thing. And also it is inclusive in its way because it's not like one standard for everyone. They have different sex divisions, age divisions that allow you to like compete against peers. So it is like, there's a real magnetism to that specific goal. But I mean, zooming out to like a greater level of generality, it's typically like achieving like a certain time goal. I mean, just like PRs or round numbers, like those types of things are very common goal types. The point I make in chasing mastery is like, what happens when, you could have a goal like qualifying for Boston, that is your white whale, like you're chasing it, it's all you can think about, you're obsessed with it. And then finally you get there and you achieve it. Like what happens? Like suddenly that's no longer the goal, the goal vanishes. It's like, been there, done that. And that goes to show you like the specific goal is never the main thing. It's like the goal is just supposed to stretch you further. And so you're not doing it right if you don't immediately replace a goal achieved with a more challenging goal. And so what that shows us is that like, there's a goal behind all the other goals. And that I argue is mastery. You just, you want to improve to the point where no further improvement is possible. So 25 lessons to this mastery that you're talking about. Did you have to stretch to 25 or did you trim off to get to 25? Good point. Well, nice question. Curious minds. Yeah, well, so chasing mastery started off as an online course that I created for 8020 Endurance, a company I co-founded. 8020 Endurance has, we have our own proprietary endurance coach certification that we offer that's been very popular, very well-received. And so we've just followed up with other courses. And I wanted, I was just, you know, really having fun with developing this mastery concept. And so I created a course. It's all, you know, so what I wrote was scripts. And then I, it's a combination of like TED Talk style and masterclass in terms of like how the filming was done. And it's all, I'm the only instructor. And so that was 20 lessons, which comes to, I don't know, it's like 12 or 14 hours of viewing. And then the plan all along was to turn the course into a book, but the script that I wrote for the course was a little too short to be a book. So the answer to your question is I stretched, I stretched to 25, but it wasn't much of a stretch, honestly, just because, I mean, I could have made it 30 lessons. And there's so many ways of coming at this topic. So as someone's listening to this podcast and they're going, hey, you know what? I do wanna be better. I want to chase, I wanna find out where that line is of mastery is for me, the experiment of one that we talk about. I wanna get there. What are some lessons that they can learn by reading the book that can help them start that journey? Yes, well, there are 25 of them. And so, I mean, what the book does is it lays- Are they in order? Are they one, two, three? Or can you just randomly pick, you know, the easiest one to start with? Yeah, good question. Yes and no, mostly yes. So what the book does is lay out a developmental process. And that's what, you know, runners don't often think of what they're doing in those terms, but that is what we're doing. You know, think of like the first time you ever did a training run or the first time you ever did like an organized race. You know, that experience really start, that marks the starting point of a developmental process. Assuming you don't just say, you know what? I'm good with finishing one 5K. I'm gonna like rest on my laurel. But like, if you come back for more, then you are engaged in this developmental process. So for me, you know, stage one, phase one, the place that you really have to start is the motivation phase. And that's where you fall in love with the sport. You develop a passion for it and you develop a hunger to see what you're capable of. Like that is truly foundational. It comes before everything. A lot of people think, oh yeah, what you need for a development is like a good training program, but a good training program does nothing for an unmotivated athlete. Like you have to have that passion and that hunger, and then you can move on to the X's and O's and, you know, just, you know, methodological optimization and all that stuff. So there are five lessons in this first developmental phase, the motivation phase. And one of the lessons focuses on the idea that in endurance sports uniquely, our limit is not physical. It is perceptual. So it's this idea that when you're out, you know, 20 miles deep into a marathon and you're really hurting, you actually could, if someone offered you a million bucks to speed up, you absolutely could, you know? Like you're suffering so much that you're like, oh my God, the wheels are coming off. I don't know if I can hold this, but if someone's like, guess what? You'll never have to work another day in your life if you speed up.


up, you're like, Oh, yeah, totally. I can speak. So that, you know, that proves that you're not really directly interacting with a hard physical limit, what you're doing is like, self regulating, like you're just, you're trying to calculate and endurance sports are all about just holding yourself back, you know, just just enough. And so big, but the thing is, because the because the limiter in endurance sports is perceptual in nature, I mean, that is still a real limit, just like a limit to pain tolerance is real, even though it's psychological, but it is mutable, like it, you can move that limit because of its psychological nature. So the more motivated you are, the more you can push through, you know, into the into the pain cave, because you want it more, it matters more to you, you're, you're, you're just enjoying more being there, even though, even though you are hurting. So the less the other take home lesson there is like, in endurance sports, there's really no such thing as being too motivated, like, I mean, if that's all you have, you're going to go off a cliff, but but like, we can get to the other stuff later. But like, there's no such thing, you want to be as motivated as you can. In that chapter, I share a couple stories of Kenyan professional marathoners who crawled across finish lines, like they were winning the race. And then they just ended up on the road, you know, and and then it's still instead of quitting, they crawled, one of them ended up just being taken off by medics, and the other one still finished third. But I'm saying like, this is what it looks like, you know, to be supremely motivated. And I mean, you know, you don't want to end up crawling across finish lines. That's not what I'm saying. But like, I'm saying like, it is possible to almost any athlete can be more motivated than they are now. And so that's something that you want to nurture. And it doesn't necessarily like, the thing you don't want to do is like, what's wrong with me, I need to be more motivated. No, you actually just want to love what you're doing more. That's what makes you more motivated, like, like having more fun, just getting more out of intrinsically out of the process itself. You know, those things are the things that will, you know, take you further as an endurance athlete. So there's an example. Boy, man, I didn't think we were going to be talking about motivation. But as you started talking about it, I started, I was motivated to write a few things down and let's talk about it. Because motivation will get you up early without an alarm clock. Motivation will put you to bed on time. Motivation will make your diet choices correct, and your training to reach in and take some hard stuff and take some easy days. Motivation will do all of that. So if that's the case, and motivation will get you to that mile 20, when you say a million dollars will get you there, or a sharp stick on the backside will keep you going, motivation will do it. So what do you say to the athlete that comes in and says, you know what, I just don't have that same eye of the tiger, the same motivation that I felt last season? What do you tell them? Yes. What I what I often tell athletes who are in that space is, um, actually, you're not unmotivated, you're just motivated for something else, right now. Because like, Oh, honestly, like, except in cases of like, you know, clinical depression, where you're just like, you know, globally unmotivated, like that would be a symptom of it. When runners just get the blahs with running it, if you unpack it, that the problem is really only that they feel obligated to be as motivated to run as they once were. And that is that it's not the it's not the decline in motivation, that's necessarily the problem. It's the fact that they feel like that they assume that's a problem. So what you know what I'll do with athletes in this situation is like, you know, like, like, what do you feel like doing right now? Because like, and there's always an answer to that, you know, they're just not framing it that way until they have like a coach walk them through it. But oftentimes, it's just like, you know, it could be, you know, they, they have their heart set on qualifying for Boston, but they actually don't even really like marathons, like they, they just, they just set that goal, because everyone around them is doing it. And, and it doesn't work that way. Like if it's, if it's not coming from inside you, and really speaking to your heart, like the motivation, it's just fake, and it's fool's gold. And, and you'll get, you know, eight weeks, 12 weeks deep into it, and, and start skipping workouts or mailing them in. So that's what I usually do is like, you know, if you're, if you're basically a normal, like a healthy, happy person, and you're just unmotivated, uncharacteristic, and uncharacteristically motivated for running, let's just find let's just like, forget any sense of obligation, and come up with something that excites you. And it could just be like, you know what, I want to try one of these hybrid races that like everyone's talking about, like, I don't know, I haven't, I don't have any friends doing it. And maybe that's why I haven't yet or whatever, or like, or, you know, I've done everything on the roads and the track, and I just want to get out on dirt for once. Or, and sometimes it can be just like, I just need to get away from it, I need to deprioritize it for the summer or the fall or whatever it is. And just like when you just open up all possibilities, you often find that like, there's no motivation problem at all. It's just like their, their motivations aren't lining up with what they used to, and you just need to give them permission to, to go in the direction, in the direction they are motivated for. And not to make excuses for anybody that might be slightly unmotivated at this point, but maybe it's your body speaking to you that you need to take a little bit of a breather, a bit of a break. Yes. There is a popular influencer out there and I won't, I'll disguise his name so that we don't know exactly who it is. And we're not picking on him, but let's say his name is Blavid Robbins. I knew this is where you were going. Is that motivation is what he is doing. Is he motivating people in the right way? I'm, I'm no expert on Blavid Robbins, but I mean, you know, like I sometimes jokingly say, like, like if, if you need a motivational speaker, like you're beyond help. Like, you know, like, I mean, honestly, like that isn't, I mean, nobody has that power that like, you know, like, you know, like, you know, like coaches and, and teachers and, and motivational speakers, like they can nurture like a person's own motivation, but like, you know, no one else can can motivate you. And if you're like, you're looking elsewhere for it, you've got the cart before the horse. So like, you know, I'm familiar with something I do know something about is like how, how different types of like how different coaching styles affect the motivation of athletes. So there's, there, there definitely is influence. Like, like imagine like, like a very, actually, this is, this is research based, like, like very dictatorial coaches who are just like, it's my way or the highway. And it's really like, you know, you win for me. And when you lose, I'm ashamed of you. Like you hurt me if you lose, like those coaches exist. And what the research shows is like their, their athletes tend to be very unmotivated, whereas coaches who are very good at what's called autonomy support. So they're, they're just like, you know, they're kind of like, you know, if, if you have to land a plane in mid flight, because the captain's become incapacitated and your fellow passengers nominate you to bring it down, and you've got someone on the ground, you know, an air traffic control, just saying like, it's okay, you can do this, I'm going to walk you through it, like, you're actually doing it, like you land the plane, and you're going to be on CNN. But aren't you glad to have the support of like an expert on the ground there? And, and that's, that's what autonomy support looks like, where, and that's like, it's a, it's a fundamental human need to have freedom of choice to feel like their preferences are being heard. They have options that they have input and coaches who do that. So it doesn't look like a pep talk, but, but a coach who supports athletes autonomy is going to nurture very motivated athletes who will, you know, run through a wall for that coach, whereas they would not for the dictatorial coach. So there's, there's lots that coaches and others can do to affect the motivation of athletes, but they don't have the power to motivate them per se. So Matt, as a coach to various types of athletes, how much time does it take you to become, or maybe you do or don't become a chameleon to understand what is it this athlete responds to? Do I need to be a dictator or a mommy? What do I need to do for this person? Yeah, good question. I mean, that's one of the themes of, of chasing mastery. It's really, you know, it's a book for athletes, but it's very much a book that coaches, you know, can read and benefit from. And, you know, the point that I make in the introduction to the book, when I'm kind of laying out this five stage developmental process is that as a coach, you have to be a different version of yourself to individual athletes based on what stage they're in, like where they are in the process. It's really just a matter of like, what, what is an athlete's greatest need right now? So in, in the beginning it's motivation and, and then it's learning. And then from learning, you go to understanding that's where you're not just monkey see monkey do, but you're actually able to make your own decisions based on kind of having internalized the principles underneath the methods. And then you get onto stage four, which is individuation, where you learn to take all these best practices you've absorbed and then really tailor them and customize them to you based on what you are learning about yourself as an athlete. And then the final phase, when you're really close to mastery is the challenging phase. And that's where like job number one is just to not get complacent because you start to feel your oats at that stage. And like, you know, you're having a lot of successes and there is a tendency, a human nature type of tendency to start coasting there. And then, and so at that stage you need a coach who just, you know, does like devil's advocate or you know, just find finds ways to throw curve balls at you. And so as a coach, you like chameleonic is kind of the word. I mean, you have to have a core as a coach because you will lose trust quickly. If like you're saying, talking out different sides of your mouth at different times, but you do have to have that shape-shifting quality to like, to be the coach that that athlete needs you to be at that time. We all know how important good sunglasses are on the trail. I mean, they help us see better and protect our eyes, but did you know, there are low quality sunglasses out there? What? Yeah, they're disposable glasses, like the ones at the gas station. But we're here to tell you that now you have a choice for high quality, high value glasses, and they don't cost as much as your new super shoes. That's why we trust Tifosi Optics. They're affordable, high quality sunglasses with superior lens optics. Their photo tech technology adapts to the changing light and with their interchangeable lenses, you're ready for any condition. And they have plenty of styles to choose from. I mean, their new Schumo models bring the next level of style and performance. Plus, if you wear prescription lenses, every frame can now be made with your prescription. And because you're part of the trail runner nation tribe, use the code TRN20 for 20% off at TifosiOptics.com. Hey runners, we get it. You need fuel that works as hard as you do. But what if your go-to snack wasn't just delicious, but also packed a protein punch? Enter Wonderful Pistachios, one of the highest protein nuts out there. Each one ounce serving delivers a whopping six grams of protein. That's over 10% of your daily value. When you're stressing your body and trying to build endurance, you need protein. Wonderful Pistachios is a great choice. Plus, they're packed with fiber and unsaturated fats to help keep you feeling fuller longer. And that's clutch for long runs, race day, or just crushing life. Many of them have that saltiness that we crave on long runs, too. And with flavors like sweet chili, salt and vinegar, snacking just got serious. So get snacking, get cracking, and fuel your next adventure with Wonderful Pistachios. Check out WonderfulPistachios.com to learn more. Or pick up some from any fine retail before your next run. They're trail tested and runner approved. So finding the right coach, I can see, is very important. But I'd like to shift it just a little bit about finding the right running group or the right running partner, because that's got to be also, you know, a very careful choice. Yes. So yeah, the model of motivation that I just pulled from in talking about autonomy support, it focuses on like three basic psychological human needs that have to be met in order for you to be motivated. So yeah, autonomy is one of them. You just have to feel like you have some say in what you're doing. And then affiliation is another one. And that's, you know, think about it. Very rarely does someone just carve out a day and do an Iron Man triathlon all by themselves. They just like go to a lake, swim 2.4 miles, hop on a bike, bike 112, and then hop off the bike and run a marathon. Anyone could do that, and you would save money. But people don't, because what gives meaning to completing that type of test is doing it in a social context. We are social animals. And so even the introverts among us, we need that. And it's just really hard to reach your full potential as a runner, as a complete lone wolf, just like off a satellite, off on your own, and maybe the only time you're ever around anyone else is on race day. It's incumbent on each runner to know just how much of that they really need and what form. So for some, it's like, do I join a group or do I just find a buddy to run with? Some people just do much better one-on-one. For others, maybe people who just draw more energy from a group, then it becomes a question of like, well, okay, which group? Because they vary a lot, right? I understand that these days, a lot of running groups are just kind of like singles dating scenes or whatever. So, you know, that could be a good fit for some and like totally the wrong place for others. You know, we've had a chance to announce some races coming at the end, and it's amazing to see, and just running the races, to see when things get hard, people link arms together and do it as a team. And they just naturally gravitate and say, let's get this done together. I'm with you, you're with me. And boy, there's a lot of strength in combining resources and helping one another through. Not a complain fest, not a chance to share the grief of the journey, but to support through the hardship and carry through those points. It's amazing. Humanity is amazing when people get together what they're capable of as a team. Yeah, it's a beautiful thing. You could kind of look at it cynically and say the best thing you can do if you're a selfish runner and all you care about is your own performance is to pretend like you care about other runners' performance because you actually do get something back from it. When I was running the Javelin 100 last fall, and it got very, very hard for me, one thing that actually just helped me just keep going was I actually started focusing on encouraging other runners because I was being passed in droves. It was like I wasn't passing anyone and everyone was passing me. And so I just tried to put a little energy into every runner who passed me, which on its face is kind of like a generous act. But I was also kind of doing it for myself because it was pulling me out of my own misery and just giving me something useful to do that I felt mattered and that I could still do even though I was having a rough time of it. So, yeah, it's one of the things I like most about our species is that when we give, we get something back. And you certainly see that in the ultra running scene. You know, I'm going to come back to the corny intro that we do on every podcast about becoming a better human. And I think that is one of the core principles that we can find, not just in running, but if you're having a tough time in life, if you have a bad job, if you're having some relationship problems, when you look outside yourself and you smile and say hi to somebody, you wave at somebody, you do something kind to a neighbor. I think that those things bring us out of and help us endure those hardships. So that's one of the things I love. I love, love, love about this sport. Yeah, there's a there's a chapter in or a lesson, I should say, in the challenging face of the last phase of the developmental model called titled personal best. And it's all about that, that idea. And for me, like, I'm definitely a bit of an idealist. And, you know, I think it's arguable that you can become the best athlete you can be without becoming the best version of yourself. But like, you can have both. And that's the path I advocate. You know, for me, ever since I was a teenage runner, that's kind of how I looked at it. You know, I saw my limiters as a runner, as as areas of growth opportunity for me as a person, like, you know, like I was too fearful and I wanted to become brave. But that's that's not really a running thing anymore, right? Like, that's like that. That's about you. And and and so that looks different for for each of us. It's not like we're all trying to become perfect and perfect as one thing. We're all different and there's certain things about ourselves we can't change. But I think we all have opportunities to grow and running can be like a very powerful vehicle for that, because, you know, whatever it is that that is limiting your development at this stage, you know, it doesn't it doesn't just a surface thing. It's it's it's there. The roots are deep in your personal psychology. And, you know, some people don't want to go there. But as an athlete and as a coach, I like to go there because it's just it's a richer journey if you feel yourself growing and maturing as a person at the same time you're developing as an athlete. Now, full disclosure for anybody that's listening, you know, Scott came up with the with the whole slogan or phrase or whatever we're going to call it, you know, maybe become a better human or a better person. However, he phrased it. And of course, I rolled my eyes to the point where I needed some physical therapy to bring him back down into my head. But then I started to believe it. And now I do believe it. And I promote it. And so all that said, has running made you a better runner or has running made you a better person overall? You know.


That's a question I'm asking everyone just to think about, maybe not an answer, well, not from Scott, because I know what he'll say. But I think there's a lot to Scott saying, and it keeps coming back to me that he was very wise to say that, which makes me think maybe he heard me say it once and he copied it. I'm not sure. But I think it does make you a better person. It makes you more tolerant. It makes you more consistent. It makes you more determined. I think that running has made us all a little bit better. That was my support to you, Scott. Ryan, you can edit all that out. Probably send it to Scott. So here's my question, Matt. What is your favorite lesson out of the 25? Which one wrote itself? Which one is like, I'm gonna write these other, this 11 and this 13, I'm gonna surround it, does that have to be 25 or 24, around it just to protect this one? Do you have one that just stood out and said, this one wrote itself? I would say it's probably hard fun. Yeah, that is a lesson where the entry point is this idea that endurance training is a lot of work. It's hard. You're frequently experiencing discomfort that you impose on yourself because this is your hobby. And in order to, and because endurance training is hard, it requires a sustained high level of motivation. Yeah, you can, from sheer willpower, you can do one hard workout one day, but what about week after week, just stacking consistent quality training? It takes a lot of motivation. And we've talked a little bit about that already, but one thing about motivation is that you can't completely manufacture it. To have, to be drawing on every possible source for motivation, you need to have some proof that what you're doing is working. It's not very motivating to do a lot of work and go nowhere and actually have proof that you're going nowhere. The numbers, you're just looking at the numbers and you're like, same as last month. Dang, I ran 200 miles last month and I'm the same. Like that is going to put a needle in the balloon of your motivation. So it's just natural for all of us to want to see evidence that the training is working. And there's some obvious places that athletes tend to go for that. You can go in for physiological testing, increasingly, these wearables and devices we use are kind of telling us, providing that kind of feedback. But for me, all of that stuff has flaws and limitations. A lot of the stuff that you get from your devices just isn't all that reliable. But even to the extent it is, it doesn't really give you much motivation to be dependent on that external feedback because you're still like, you're like, oh, well, what I'm doing is only going to be worth it if I get the number I want. Well, then you're sort of waiting for your motivation. Like you need to be motivated now and you don't get fitter every day. So I'm sorry, even if the data you're getting is 100% accurate, your watch might say your VO2 max went up today or down today, but it didn't. So for me, I totally get it as a coach like it's purely, it's just simply rational to want to see evidence that what you're doing is working. But I think the most reliable source for that type of feedback to show that you're on track is what I call the hard fun test, which is completely subjective and psychological in nature. And it's simply this. So if like on a one to five scale, like one is you're not having fun at all and five is you're having as much fun as you ever have as running, you want to be at a five. And at the same time, like with, you want your training to be hard too, because if it's easy, you're not getting fitter. And it's also not fun if it's easy, if you're wired like we are, like you want it to be challenging. But then if it's too challenging, there's like a Goldilocks zone, like it's also not fun. And also, you know, when it's too hard, it's also not working. So, and like, you know, these things sound unscientific because they are subjective, but there's actually science proving that these subjective ways of assessing how things are going are more reliable than any of the objectives. Like athletes are actually really good. Like if you answer, I mean, if you ask like a runner off the street, like, hey, how hard is your training these days generally? Like, they're not going to be like, oh, I don't know. They're going to actually be able to give you an answer. And like, that answer is going to be like, they're not just pulling it out of their rear end. And same thing with like, are you enjoying your training? Like every athlete can answer that question. And there's just, it's not going to happen where an athlete says, oh, I'm really not enjoying it, but I'm making tons of progress. You know what I mean? Like absolutely never going to happen at all. It's chicken and the egg. It's partly because progress is fun, but it's partly because fun is progress. And those things that you can do, like you don't have to like, you know, block out a Wednesday to go to an exercise science lab and kill yourself on a treadmill and a VO2 max test to see if you're getting fitter. Like that kind of hard fun test, that subjective self check-in, you can do anytime along the way and make all of these little, and sometimes not so little course corrections. So that's what you want, is to pass the hard fun test with flying colors. So you're going to have to expand just a little bit. Are you saying that we should have sometimes that we're out there on our training day and just having fun, and the other days you're out there for the purpose of making it hard? So you're kind of playing the extremes on that one to five scale, and you're not always at a three or you're not always at a two or you're not always at a five? Not exactly. Like I'm zooming out a little bit from that. So I'm not asking like, how much fun is today's run? Or how hard is today's run? I'm like, look at the last month of your training. Like how much fun were you having, broadly speaking over that month and how hard was that month of training? So just zooming out a little bit. Cause like, obviously it's like, like watching your stock portfolio too closely. Like you could have all kinds of unnecessary stress, you know, the overall trend could be really positive. Your nest egg is growing, but you could have, you know, eight days in a month when it goes down. And if you're like just watching it in real time, you're gonna have some, you know, five, eight, eight, not necessarily stressful days. So yeah, that's what I'm talking about. You know, Matt, I think it's kind of interesting that the runner that you chose to illustrate your example was a stoner surfer dude that just said, I don't know. So I had a question, but I got, I derailed myself. So I no longer want this. You know, I'm gonna back away from the 25 and this five-step process for a minute and just say, as you're going through all this, I'm finding out that chasing mastery is a little bit more complicated than I want to run a half marathon. So I'm gonna Google training plan for a half marathon in 20 weeks, let's say. And it's a spreadsheet that says you should run this on this day, this on this day, this on this day. And you should have a long run on the week, whatever the training plan is. I think that those are training plans, but that doesn't necessarily get you to this. And maybe it's not a static point. It's more of a moving target, this chasing mastery piece. There's more involved in it than a spreadsheet of days and times to run. Yes, exactly so. I mean, really it's a matter of, you know, when we set a goal to reach our full potential as runners, you know, we're embarking on a process that we have some control over, but not absolute control, right? So all kinds of things can happen that are outside your control that could help or hinder your development, most likely hinder. But what mastery is all about is really gaining control over the part you can control. And only a tiny percentage of runners are there, you know, just who are like, you know, just understanding the difference between what they can and can't control and controlling the controllable part to their maximum advantage. I'll just give you a quick example that came, it's from today. There are two runners I coach who are like about at the same level in their performances. They don't know each other. And both of them did race pace workouts. One of them was like 10K pace. One of them was 5K pace yesterday. And one of them, like I would say, just executed the workout very poorly. This is a runner who he had a time in his head, like, this is the pace I wanna run. If I had just sat him down and asked him to defend his choice, he would have probably had a hard time. He just like, it was a number he liked and wanted, but it wasn't really based on looking in, it was based on looking out. And so he went into the workout just like, this is the pace I wanna run. And he fell apart. It was too aggressive. And then he didn't adjust. And he just kind of like tried to hold that pace until he couldn't. And so every rep was slower than the one before. And it wasn't even the workout. He just practiced hurting himself and slowing down instead of like getting practice at 5K pace. The other runner, he told me afterwards, it was similar. He said like, I could tell during my warmup that I didn't have my best legs, but I just kind of managed it. And like, I look at his splits and he actually got faster over the course of the workout. Because like what he was doing, he was asserting the control he had. The first runner was just like, he was making himself, he was just kind of like chaining himself to a semi-arbitrary number and just hoping it worked out. And just was not using the control that was at his disposal to really nail that workout and get more out of it. Whereas the other runner was like, well, I would prefer to have my best legs today, but I don't. And just like eyes on the prize, I still want to get the most I can out of the workout and chaining myself to my original goal until I flame out is not the way to get the most out of the session. And so I mentioned like these two runners are about at the same ability, but I can tell you which one's going to improve more over the next year. And so that's what we're talking about with mastery. So yes, it is complicated and it puts, not complicated, but like there's a lot to it. And it puts a lot of responsibility on the athlete. And that can be like daunting for some, but I mean, like, I'm sorry, there's no other path actually. Like, you know, like that's what mastery is. It's like you being the boss of the controllable elements of your running journey. So I'm just going to throw this up because it's free to do and just general discussion. Maybe that athlete that broke himself or herself at that pace was using that as motivation to get out there and push themselves to a place that they didn't realize they could even do, that they had self-limited themselves, but stretching for this stretch goal, they could discover, wow, I've got more speed. I've got more strength in my legs and endurance in my heart that I even realized. Could that be, I'm trying to defend the person that blew up. Yeah, I mean, I think there are selective scenarios where it can kind of make sense to just like, you know, go to failure. But like as, but really for the most part, those are simply wasted opportunities. That's all it is. Like you're not even really being present in the workout. You know, it's actually much easier to just pick a number and see if you can do it. Like there's like, you don't have to listen to your body. You don't have to make smart adjustments. You're just picking a number, maybe out of a hat, maybe because you like, it's your friend's PR and you want to beat your friend. Like, you don't know if it's right or not because you didn't bother to think about it. And then you just go out there and try to run that pace. Neither you can or you can't. Like, where's that going to lead? Like, imagine if it really were a race and like, that's what you were doing. Like, are you going to finish saying, all right, well, it wasn't, I didn't have my best legs today, but I still got the best result possible. No, like, you have to do it the way the other athlete did it, which is like, to be mindful, to listen to your body, to make smart adjustments, to have that level of self-trust. So yeah, I mean, so no, no, Don, sorry. That's okay. It's okay for me to be wrong. Much like that, that pace that I chose, it's okay to crash and burn sometimes. That's what happened to me. Hey, Matt, in this, the five pillars of mastery, there's a story or an example you tell on self-regulation and mastery of, and I don't know if I'm going to say his last name right, Jacob Ingebrigtsen? Jacob Ingebrigtsen, yeah. Tell us a little bit about what he did or does. Yeah, Jacob Ingebrigtsen, who's, it's like, I think he's 24 years old, maybe 25. He's got Olympic medals, world championship medals. He's one of the, he's at this, he's on track to be one of the best runners who ever lived. He's broken world records. He's a phenom, and he's Norwegian, and there's a lot of really great endurance athletes coming out of Norway now, which has led to this idea of a Norwegian wave or the Norwegian method. And Ingebrigtsen's approach and that of other top Norwegian endurance athletes is very controlled and measured. And so what they're trying to do is, they're not trying to complete heroic epic workouts. They are just trying to stack bricks. And so it's kind of prosaic and workmanlike, their approach. And so they're sort of like, they're working hard and working consistently, but always leaving something in the tank, like day after day after day. And it's not just the Norwegians, like Eliud Kipchoge, who also arguably one of the greatest runners who's ever lived. He talks in a very similar way. He has said like, I never go 100% in training. I go like 50%, four days a week, and 80%, three days a week. And I save 100% for race day. So that self-regulation, it's hard for all of us, but it's even harder at the highest levels of the sport where you're trying to be better than everyone, to actually not look over your shoulder at what other people are doing and have that trust in the long-term process where you never feel like you have to test your fitness. Because that comes from a place of insecurity. It's just like, how fit am I really? Well, I know I'll just go race and training and then I'll see. Well, unfortunately, because that comes from a place of insecurity, you're just going to do it again tomorrow too, because you need reassurance. And then suddenly like your training is erratic and not very productive. So it takes, what you often see in the true masters of endurance sports is restraint. Grit is kind of table stakes. Yeah, we all have to be gritty to get a seat at the table for our development as runners. But once you're at that table, what is really often difference-making is the ability to hold yourself back, which it's easier said than done and champions are doing it. And it's very much tied into the psychology of self-regulation. On your scale, you used a scale earlier on the fun hard of one to five. Let's say that it's a one to five scale again, and five is that self-mastery. And one is none at all. When runners come to you as a coach, where do you find most of them at what level? Yeah, I mean, there are no fives. Yeah. And yeah, and then a lot of ones, twos and threes, but it can also be mixed. It can be, I think I'm oversimplifying a bit because you can have athletes who are strong in certain areas of mastery and weak in others. And also one thing I noticed is, I can get an athlete who's very new to the sport. They don't have a lot of experience and I can see their potential to develop right away. So that's the thing. It's not like, moving toward mastery, it's not like buying a ticket and taking a ride. Like you actually have to do it and you do it by learning and sort of like taking ownership of the process from the get-go. And you see the athletes who have that, they don't know anything yet. So they make a lot of mistakes when left to their own devices, but they learn and they don't keep repeating the same mistakes over and over. So that kind of conflates it a little bit because you can have athletes who are just like kind of naturals for self-regulation who are early in their development. And then you can have others who they've been at it much longer and they have developed quite a bit, but it's been a struggle for them because they don't have the it factor of being kind of like natural learners or just being like gifted with self-regulation. When I listen to these, if I go through the 25 lessons, I've got to think that there are a number of these that can be practiced throughout the training cycle. And I have to have some grit and I have to have perseverance. I need to be able to self-regulate and all the way through so you can reach your goal of race day. But then also on race day, you can still practice these 25 throughout the entire race, whatever it might be. There'll be a moment that you need some of those lessons. I'm kind of thinking of fluidity. You need to accept a bad day or a bad patch or a bad section of the trail from one day station to the next. There's gonna be ups and downs through training and there's gonna be ups and downs through race day. And you can practice all of this and all of it applies, whether it's long-term or short-term. Yes, very much so. One element of the book that I haven't mentioned is that, so after every chapter, so the chapters are short, right? Because if they were 25 long chapters, it would be the Bible. So yeah, they're all, it's like 2000 word-ish chapters. So each one's a quick read, but then after each one, there is like an exercise that you can do. It's usually some kind of like reflective light writing or something like the hard fun test where you just, it gives you a chance to kind of like,


One thing to just passively absorb the ideas presented in a 2000 word chapter, it's another thing to immediately be asked to apply those ideas, like at least in writing or in your mind or through some mental exercise. So it's the idea that, you know, like I'm the coach, I'm the author, but I can't do this for you, you know, like, so now that you've absorbed the ideas in the last chapter, let's see what you can do with these ideas. And I think that will help them stick and will help athletes get in this mindset of like, you know, these aren't ideas just to, you know, contemplate or ruminate on, like there are things that I can apply in my training now, on race day, whenever. One of the gifts that you have as an author and in many of your books, they're not just something that you sit on the beach and read, they're more of a workbook. There's places to take notes, there's places to make plans and work through. And I love that about this book as well, is that the chapters are short, I like short chapters. It's a page turner, Matt, it's a page turner. But then at the end of each chapter, you have a chance to reflect and apply the principle that you learned in that chapter. And so kudos for you on that. I know many of your books have similar themes where it's more of a workbook than just a novel. Yeah, I mean, exactly. So it's really just like a book for me is an extension of my coaching. And, you know, in the coaching I do with any individual athlete, like I'm trying, I see it almost as my job to put myself out of a job. You know, like an athlete who needs their coach hasn't achieved mastery yet. And so part of the process is just gradually like handing more of it over and over to the athlete, not because I'm a lazy coach and I don't want to do my job, but because that is my job. Like I'm trying to empower an athlete to really take ownership and control over their training and racing, because ultimately they have to, you know, they simply, the coach, there's just a limit to what coaches can do. And really you're actually slowing the athlete down by just insisting on keeping the training wheels on, even when they're ready to ride on two wheels. So that's what I'm doing in my books as well. And I think that's part of the reason they're probably not for everyone. Like some people are more receptive to, hey folks, I got it all figured out. Here's the formula. Like just memorize it and you don't have to do anything else. Like for me, it's like, no, like you actually have to do all of it. But what I can do is lay out a roadmap for you and cheer you along. Well, we really appreciate you putting all these lessons into one spot and making it a page turner. Tell us a little bit more about your dream camp, your running camp in Arizona that you have that will probably teach some of these lessons in real time. Yeah, dream run camp is kind of like a fantasy training retreat for runners. There are a lot of adult running camps out there. Most of them are just like long weekends and ours operates year round on a small scale. And our format is what I call rolling attendance where individual athletes just can come on their own whenever their schedule suits them. We get a lot of teachers and college students in the summer when they're not in school, retirees in the winter. And you sort of just arrive whenever you like and then you get to know the other runners who are here and the coaches and the community we have around us. And it's just an opportunity, if you have that passion for the sport and that hunger to improve, it's an environment, it is like the perfect environment for you to just fall even more in love with running, like learn more, get inspired, get some really high quality training in, in like an incredible place to run at high altitude. And yeah, just like get to know the community a bit. And it's, I just, I created it because I thought, well, it was really based on an experience I had as a fake professional runner here in Flagstaff in 2017. I just wanted to make a version of that available to anyone who wants it, dreamrun.com for more. Nice. It's really unique. That's what I love about it. You don't have to, I mean, you have to plan for it, but it's unique. You can go for however long you have. And I think that's kind of, yeah, I think that's really, really cool. You can also find more about Matt, his coaching and all of his 35 books at mattfitzgerald.org. Matt, thanks for coming on and thanks for writing this book. I haven't made it all the way through, so I'm looking forward to finishing it. And hopefully I will be on my quest to chase mastery. But wherever you are on your journey to chase mastery, you still have to put on your shoes. You still have to lace them up and you have to still run. Mass. As we wind down another episode of Trail Runner Nation, we'd like to extend our heartfelt thanks to each and every one of you for tuning in. Your support fuels our passion and keeps this community thriving. And a special shout out goes to our incredible team that makes all of this possible. Ryan Ward, he's our wizard behind the scenes, expertly producing and editing to make us sound our best. Yana Clayton, our social media guru, keeps the conversation going online. If you need any help with social media, contact her at ascentmediasolutions.com. You can trust her too. She's a trail runner and found often running around Chamonix. That's in France, Scott. Remember to keep up with us between episodes by visiting our website and following us on our social media. For the full unedited video episodes, you get to see how crappy we sound without Ryan. Make sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel. And if you love what you're hearing, tell a friend or two, your word of mouth is our greatest endorsement. If our content has helped you at all in your running journey, consider supporting us. You can find exclusive deals from our sponsors on our deals page or show some love directly through our Patreon channel. Every bit helps in keeping this content going that you love. Before we sign off, is there something more you'd like to hear from our podcast? We're all ears. Your feedback not only helps us grow, but ensures that we're delivering the content that you crave. You can comment on social media or you can contact us through our website. We read everything. From all of us at Trailrunner Nation, thank you for running with us. Stay wild, stay free and keep hitting those trails. Until next time, run mass.
